Migrating apps to another cloud (#5530)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/developerportal/deploy/migrating-to-different-cloud.md

---
title: "Migrate from to a Different Public Cloud Datacenter"
url: /developerportal/deploy/migrating-on-public-cloud/
weight: 10
description: "How to migrate your app from one Mendix Public Cloud datacenter to another."
tags: ["App","Migrate","Developer Portal","public cloud","Node"]
aliases:
    - /developerportal/howto/migrating-to-v4.html
    - /developerportal/howto/migrating-to-v4
    - /developerportal/deploy/migrating-to-v4
#To update these screenshots, you can log in with credentials detailed in How to Update Screenshots Using Team Apps.
---

## 1 Introduction

> This document explains how to migrate your licensed app from one Mendix public cloud datacenter to another.

Reviewer: Perhaps a use case, an example, and/or a link to the list of data centers https://docs.mendix.com/developerportal/deploy/mxcloudv4/#2-where-will-my-data-be-hosted

Author: @schrysinas I'd like to add a use case as Mark suggested. What reason could someone have to migrate their app to a different node?

## 2 Migration considerations

{{% alert color="warning" %}}
Do not upgrade your runtime version at the same time as migrating your app. This is because potential errors from upgrading the runtime version can be incorrectly ascribed to a failed migration. If you do choose to upgrade your runtime version at the same time as migrating your app, Mendix Support will not be able to assist you.

If you need to upgrade your runtime version, ensure that it is fully tested and ready before attempting to migrate.
{{% /alert %}}

You will need to take the following into account when migrating your app:

* If you are using Mendix 7, you might want to split long-running scheduled events into smaller chunks, using a queueing system like the Amazon SQS connector to spread the work out over multiple instances
* If you use a mail server from your app, you will need to use a third-party email provider – for more information, see [Sending Email](/developerportal/deploy/sending-email/)
* If you use an FTP server in your app, you will need to use a third-party FTP provider

> * If you are currently using a VPN to secure your app, you will have to use one of the recommended methods discussed in [Securing Outgoing Connections from Your Application](/developerportal/deploy/securing-outgoing-connections-from-your-application/) instead

Reviewer: I don't think these are relevant any more. They were changes between Cloud V3 and Cloud V4.

Author: @schrysinas Hi Stamatios, could you take a look at that comment from Mark? Should I delete the above prereqs?

## 3 Prerequisites

There are two methods of doing the migration. For both of them you first need to ensure that your app is on a supported version of Mendix, Mendix version 7.0 and above. For the best level of support, we recommend that you use version 7.23 which is the [long term support](/releasenotes/studio-pro/lts-mts/) version of Mendix version 7.

For further prerequisites see the sections below.

> ## 4 Using the Migration Tool

Reviewer: Is this migration tool still available? For me it is offline?
It was written specifically for V3 to V4, so I'm not sure it will work for V4 to V4 anyhow.
I think that customers will have to do this manually?

Mendix has written a migration tool to help you transfer your data from your app to a new environment. It also switches to your new environment for you when it is ready to go.

We strongly advise you to use this method to migrate your app as it makes the migration much easier to initiate and monitor. We also suggest that you perform a [final migration](#final-migration) of your `production` environment only after you have successfully migrated the lower environments, for example `test` and `acceptance`. This will help to find out any potential issues beforehand.

The flow below shows the stages of using the migration tool, and an indication of the status of the app in both the original environment and the new environment at each stage.

{{< figure src="/attachments/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy/mxcloudv4/migrating-to-v4/migration-process-overview.png" alt="Overview of Migration Process"   width="66%"  >}}

### 4.1 Prerequisites

To migrate your app, you need the following prerequisites:

> * Have a [Mendix Cloud](/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy/) node available. This must have the subdomain name `<current-app-name>-v4`. To request a licensed Cloud Node, use the [Request New App Node](https://newnode.mendix.com/) app.

Author: I'm not sure if that's correct, where can I verify this?

Reviewer: This was the case before, the migration tool used the -v4 suffix automatically when switching between the V3 and V4 app. Need to check with the team behind it - perhaps Ravi Singh would know the best person to talk to?

    * Number of instances
    * Scheduled Events
    * Constants
    * HTTP headers
    * Path based access restrictions
    * Outgoing connections certificates
    * Custom runtime settings
    * Custom environment variables
    * Preferred maintenance window
    * Tags
    * Custom Domain Certificates – the new environment will need to have the same Custom Domain Certificates as the previous environment; see [Changing a Custom Domain](#custom-domain) for advice on copying Custom Domain Certificates

    {{% alert color="info" %}}You do not need to point your **Custom Domains** to a new destination. When the app is migrated, it will be given the same name as your current app and so your Custom Domain will automatically pick up the migrated app.{{% /alert %}}

### 4.3 Replicating the Data {#replicating-data}

Now that you have your new Mendix Cloud environment, you can start replicating the data.

The system transfers database data using PostgreSQL dump and restore. Files are replicated to the Mendix Cloud environment continuously while replication is active.

Below are the steps to start with the migration.

> 1. Open the [Migration Tool](https://v3-v4-migration.mendixcloud.com/), `https://v3-v4-migration.mendixcloud.com/`.

Author: Needs verification.

Reviewer: Seems to be offline for me.

2. Choose the app that you want to migrate from the list of apps for which you are the technical contact.

3. The target node will be filled with the name `<current-app-name>-v4`.

4. Select the source and target environments. In most cases, these will have the same name. For example, you want to replicate data from one `production` environment to another.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy/mxcloudv4/migrating-to-v4/select-v3-node-to-migrate.png" alt="Select v3 node and environment" >}}

5. Ensure that the app in the target environment is stopped. You cannot replicate data into an app that is running.

6. Click **Replicate data and files**.

    The replication process copies all the data in the database, including files based on `FileDocument` entities, such as images, which are stored in the storage of the source app node.

7. Once data transfer is complete, the progress is at 100%.

{{% alert color="info" %}}

> Database dump-restore will run twice – once on replication activation, and again on the stop of replication (if the **Interrupt** option has not been set – for details, see the section below). This is to ensure that the latest data on the source database for your application is copied to the Cloud v4 app.

Reviewer: To the new app (both apps are now V4)
```suggestion
Database dump-restore will run twice – once on replication activation, and again on the stop of replication (if the **Interrupt** option has not been set – for details, see the section below). This is to ensure that the latest data on the source database for your application is copied to the new app.
```

{{% /alert %}}

### 4.4 Checking the Migration Status

1. Click the **Migration** icon to see the status of your replications.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy/mxcloudv4/migrating-to-v4/migration-page.png" alt="Icon for migration page" >}}

2. Once initial data transfer is complete, progress will be at 100%.

The migration page lists all the ongoing migrations, including the following information:

* The source and target environments
* The UUID of the source production environment
* Whether the tool is current **Replicating** files to the new environment or is **Stopped**
* What proportion of the source files have been replicated – this will sometimes show zero
    * If replication is not running
    * During the replication process when the process checks whether files are synchronized
* The UUID of the target production environment
* The **Stop replication** button with an **Interrupt** option if the tool is currently replicating
    * If you click **Stop replication** without checking the **Interrupt** option, the replication will stop when all the data is replicated.

>     * If you check the **Interrupt** option, replication will stop as soon as possible when you click **Stop replication** leaving the v4 database in an incomplete and probably inconsistent state. On the Migration Status page you will see the state as *failed* when you select this option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * If you check the **Interrupt** option, replication will stop as soon as possible when you click **Stop replication** leaving the database for the new app in an incomplete and probably inconsistent state. On the Migration Status page you will see the state as *failed* when you select this option.
```

{{% /alert %}}

{{% alert color="info" %}}
We also recommend that you stop replication at least once before the final migration because, when replication is stopped, there are more operations and these take additional time. If the replication is stopped, the last operation timing will include these additional operations, thus becoming more accurate.
{{% /alert %}}

There are two more requirements before you can start the final migration:

* The replication process for the production environments must have transferred all the data at some point in time, even if more data has been added since — in other words, the replication process for production must have reached 100% at least once.
* The replication process must be in a **Replicating** state.

To do the final migration of your app, do the following:

* Click **Migrate** on the migration page. This does the following:

    1. Stops the app running on the source node.
    2. Stops the app running on the target node.
    3. Runs the replication process for the *Production* environments until it reaches 100%.

>     4. Renames the subdomain of the original app and all environments to be `<current-app-name>-v3`.

Author: Needs verification

Reviewer: If it calls it v3 that is going to be confusing.
But I'm not sure this app is going to be available?

    5. Removes the `-v4` suffix from the subdomain name of the new v4 app and **all** environments.
    6. Restarts both the new app and the original app.

### 4.6 Rollback

If you encounter issues with your app when running on the new cloud node, then you can revert to the original version.

* Click **Rollback** on the migration page. This does the following:

    1. Stops the app running on the target node.
    2. Stops the app running on the source node.

>     3. Renames the subdomain of the app running on Mendix Cloud v4 and **all** environments to be `<current-app-name>-v4`

Author: Needs verification

>     3. Renames the subdomain of the app running on Mendix Cloud v4 and **all** environments to be `<current-app-name>-v4`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Renames the subdomain of the new app and **all** environments to be `<current-app-name>-v4`
```

>     4. Removes the `-v3` suffix from the subdomain name of the original v3 app and **all** environments

Reviewer: The original app is not going to be a v3 app any more.

{{% alert color="warning" %}}
This will not copy any data from the new environment back to the original environment. Any data added to the new database before the rollback is effectively lost.
{{% /alert %}}

### 4.7 Troubleshooting

If you encounter any issues during the migration process, use the following troubleshooting tips to help you solve them.

#### 4.7.1 Data Replication Fails or Times Out

If the replication process fails during the final migration, or it times out (the timeout for dump restore is 20 minutes longer than the measured operation time, displayed on the Migration Status page), then the apps and environments will not be renamed and the apps in the original environments will be restarted.

It is safe to restart replicating the data to bring the data replicated back up to 100%. This should ensure that the final migration does not time out.

Please contact Mendix Support if you encounter this problem so that we can identify any common issues.

#### 4.7.2 Rename and Restart Failures

If the apps and environments cannot be successfully renamed, or the apps cannot be successfully restarted, the changes will be rolled back as described above.

> ## 5 Migrating the App Manually

Reviewer: I think this is the section that will make it to the final document.

{{% alert color="warning" %}}
These instructions are provided in case you have problems using the migration tool above. We recommend that you use the migration tool whenever possible. Please contact [Mendix Support](https://support.mendix.com) if you are having difficulty with the migration tool and only use these instructions as a last resort.

> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer: Not if the migration tool is no longer available.

To manually migrate your app to a different node in the Mendix Cloud, follow the steps in the sections below.

> {{< figure src="/attachments/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy/mxcloudv4/migrating-to-v4/migratev4.png" >}}

Reviewer: Picture still refers to V3

3. Click **select a node**.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy/mxcloudv4/migrating-to-v4/select-a-node.png" >}}

4. Select the target node by clicking **Use this Node** and link it to your app.

For more information on how to do this, see [Licensing Mendix Cloud Apps](/developerportal/deploy/licensing-apps/#licensed-node).

### 5.3 Copying the Deployment Package and Data from the Source Node to the Target Node

Before migrating, you need to deploy a copy of your app to the target node. You can then copy the data from the source node to the target node. After copying the data, you should test the app, and correct errors if needed. Repeat this until all the errors are solved.

The following steps explain how to do this.

#### 5.3.1 Downloading and Uploading the Deployment Package

Download the deployment package of your app hosted in the source node and upload the deployment package to the app hosted in the target node.

To download a deployment package, follow these steps:

1. Go to **Environments** of the source app.

2. Click **Details** for a **Deployment Package**.

3. Click **Download Package**.

>     {{< figure src="/attachments/developerportal/deploy/mendix-cloud-deploy/mxcloudv4/migrating-to-v4/download-package.png" >}}

Reviewer: This image has a very old version of Mendix in it. I think I need to look at linking a much more up-to-date app with our production environment!

(It's on my backlog!)
